---
title: HSL 1.1.3 – Array Capacity
---

Welcome to Homebrew Standard Library. In this series, we reimplement the C++ Standard Library piece-by-piece, to understand it better. You can find the introduction and table of contents [here][IntroPost]. The full source code for this project is available on [GitHub][GitHubRepo].

After the last post, we can do just about everything with `array` that we could with an ordinary, C-style array (plus bounds-checking, minus `begin` and `end`). In this post, we'll begin to add to that, with capacity functions.

## Size

The simplest capacity function (and the only one with any real use) is [`size`][StdArraySize], which returns just what its name implies. Since the size of the array is a template parameter, we don't need to store it anywhere, we can just return it. As you might expect, the function is `constexpr` since the size is known at compile-time, `const` since it doesn't modify the array, in any way, and [`noexcept`][Noexcept] since there's no reason for it to throw.

In `array.hpp`:

```cpp
template<typename T, size_t N>
class array
{
public:
    // ...
    constexpr size_type size() const noexcept { return N; }
};
```

## max_size and empty

As I've mentioned before, `array`'s interface borrows from that of `vector`. What I haven't mentioned is that this tendency goes beyond what's really necessary. `vector` contains two additional capacity functions:

```cpp
std::vector<int> vec;

vec.max_size(); // Returns size of underlying array
vec.empty();    // Returns true if size is 0
```

For `vector`, `max_size` is useful if you want to check whether adding elements will end up allocating memory, or whether the underlying array is bigger than it needs to be. For `array`, [it's][StdArrayMaxSize] just an alias for `size`.

Likewise, `vector`'s `empty` function is useful if you're removing elements one-by-one, and you want to check whether you're done. But for `array`, [it][StdArrayEmpty] always returns `true`, unless `N` happens to be `0`, which is possible, but not useful.

In `array.hpp`:

```cpp
template<typename T, size_t N>
class array
{
public:
    // ...
    constexpr size_type max_size() const noexcept { return N; }
    constexpr bool empty() const noexcept { return true; }
};
```

`empty` should really be defined as `return !N;`, but `N == 0` is a special case, and I want to handle it all at once.

## tuple_size

`array` also borrows `tuple`'s method of getting its size: a helper class called `tuple_size`. `tuple_size` is a class template, which takes the type of a particular `tuple`, and contains the tuple's size as a static constant called `value`.

```cpp
std::tuple<bool, int, double> tup;

std::tuple_size<decltype(tup)>::value;  // # of elements in tuple
```

Our [`tuple_size`][StdTupleSizeStdArray] will be a partial specialization of the one defined in the `tuple` header, where the template argument is some type of `array`.

In `array.hpp`:

```cpp
#include "tuple.hpp"
// ...
// B/w deduction guide and get
template<typename T, size_t N>
class tuple_size<array<T, N> > {};
```

`tuple_size` is a subclass of [`integral_constant`][StdIntegralConstant], which provides the `value` member. `integral_constant` takes two template parameters:

1. `value`'s type, which in our case is `size_t`, and
2. Its value, which is `N`.

In `array.hpp`:

```cpp
// B/w deduction guide and get
template<typename T, size_t N>
class tuple_size<array<T, N> > : public integral_constant<size_t, N> {};
```

We need to create a `tuple.hpp` header, and create an alias for `tuple_size` in it. We also need to create an alias for `integral_constant` in `type_traits.hpp`. And that's it. We don't need to define any members besides what `integral_constant` provides.

[IntroPost]: /hsl/2018/11/16/introduction.html
[GitHubRepo]: https://github.com/bobcarterirl/homebrew-standard-library
[StdArraySize]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/array/size
[Noexcept]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/noexcept_spec
[StdArrayMaxSize]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/array/max_size
[StdArrayEmpty]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/array/empty
[StdTupleSizeStdArray]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/array/tuple_size
[StdIntegralConstant]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/types/integral_constant
