---
title: HSL 1.2.2 – Vector Getters
---

Today, we're continuing the theme of doing the easy parts first, and implementing `vector`'s 'getters'. In practice, what I mean by 'getters' are all of the capacity functions that are specified as `const`, plus `get_allocator`, which really doesn't fit anywhere else.

## max_size ##

We'll begin with [`max_size`][std::vector::max_size], which is the easiest since it only returns a constant, specifically the maximum, theoretical size of a `vector`. This comes down to the greatest possible value of `difference_type`. We can access this value using [`numeric_limits`][std::numeric_limits]:

In `vector.hpp`:

```cpp
#include "limits.hpp"   // Create file and add "using std::numeric_limits"
// ...
// Below member types
size_type max_size() const noexcept
{
    return numeric_limits<difference_type>::max();
}
```

## size ##

In the last [post][1.2.1], we noted that the size of a `vector` can't be stored as a template argument. It isn't accessible through the `unique_ptr` to the underlying array or through `allocator` either, so we'll have to make it a member, and we'll return that member with the [`size`][std::vector::size] function:

In `vector.hpp`:

```cpp
// Above max_size
size_type size() const noexcept
{
    return arr_size;
}
// ...
// Below arr
size_type arr_size;
```

## capacity ##

Changing the size of a `vector` requires dynamic allocation, which is expensive. It would be handy if our `vector` implementation would allocate more space than it currently needs, in situations where it's likely to need more later. But, if we were to enable this (and we will, since the standard requires it) the size of a `vector` would often be smaller than the size of its underlying array. Let's introduce some terminology, here: the number of elements in a `vector` is, naturally, called its 'size'; the number of elements in its underlying array -- *i.e.* the number of elements a vector *can* hold before it needs to allocate more space -- is called its 'capacity'.

We'll need to store the capacity in a separate member, and have a [separate member function][std::vector::capacity] to access it:

In `vector.hpp`:

```cpp
// Below max_size
size_type capacity() const noexcept
{
    return arr_cap;
}
// ...
// Under arr_size
size_type arr_cap;
```

## empty ##

[`empty`][std::vector::empty] is very simple. [Like it did for `array`][1.1.3], `empty` returns `true` if the `vector`'s size is `0`, and false otherwise:

In `vector.hpp`:

```cpp
// Above size
bool empty() const noexcept
{
    return arr_size == 0;
}
```

## get_allocator ##

So is [`get_allocator`][std::vector::get_allocator]. It returns a copy of the `vector`'s allocator:

In `vector.hpp`:

```cpp
// Above empty
allocator_type get_allocator() const noexcept
{
    return alloc;
}
```

I edited [the last post][1.2.1] to include the definition of `alloc`, so check that, if you missed it.

That's all for the getters. Next time we'll handle the element accessors.


[1.1.3]: /hsl/containers/array/2018/12/12/capacity.html
[1.2.1]: /hsl/containers/vector/2019/03/01/skeleton.html
[std::vector::max_size]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector/max_size
[std::vector::size]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector/size
[std::vector::capacity]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector/capacity
[std::vector::empty]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector/empty
[std::vector::get_allocator]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector/get_allocator
[std::numeric_limits]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/types/numeric_limits
